标题,标题链接,search-detail,limit_width1,https,作者,日期,https1,down,详情标题,日期时间,内容
人工智能,https://blog.csdn.net/reminacce/article/details/79549513,自动驾驶系统的挑战与加速我们看一下自动驾驶的前景如何：主流的自动驾驶公司。            Google, Uber, Tesla and Mobileye,投入大量的人力和物力未来的市场前景：     Demand of this application continues to grow leadingto ever increasing investment from industry...,https://blog.csdn.net/reminacce/article/details/79549513,,reminacce,2018-03-14,//blog.csdn.net/reminacce/article/details/79549513,210次阅读,人工智能 - reminacce的博客,2018年03月14日 08:59:31,原        人工智能
      
      
        
                                                  2018年03月14日 08:59:31
          reminacce
          阅读数：212
                  
        
                  
      
    
  
  
    
            
                              
          
            自动驾驶系统的挑战与加速我们看一下自动驾驶的前景如何：主流的自动驾驶公司。            Google, Uber, Tesla and Mobileye,投入大量的人力和物力未来的市场前景：     Demand of this application continues to grow leadingto ever increasing investment from industry. Intel recentlyacquired Mobileye, a leader in computer vision-based autonomousdriving technology, for $15.3 billion [66]. Reportsshow that by 2035, automobiles with autonomous drivingfeatures are expected to capture 25% of the automotive market,which translates to 18 million vehicles [21], and the sizeof the autonomous driving vehicle market is expected to leapto $77 billion by 2035 [21].自动驾驶系统的技术挑战？总的来说：            正确性-----计算量大            低延迟，实时响应            低功耗设计Architecting autonomous driving systems is particularlychallenging for a number of reasons. These systems mustmake the łcorrect” operational decision at all times to avoidaccidents, thereby advanced machine learning, computervision and robotic processing algorithms, typically computationallyintensive, are employed to deliver the required highprecision. Despite the large amount of computation, it is criticalfor such mission critical system to be able to react to thetraic condition at real-time, which means the processingalways needs to inish at strict deadlines. Furthermore, thesystem needs to perform the necessary computation undercertain power budget to avoid negatively impacting the drivingrange and fuel eiciency of the vehicle by large amounts那么作者提出3个问题？第一：自动驾驶系统的设计限制是什么？作者从6个方面纤细解读。延迟小鱼100毫秒，处理10帧每秒，功耗的限制。这些都是系统的需求与限制。使命关键的实时处理系统。To answer these questions, we irst investigate the designconstraints for autonomous driving systems. We identify sixclasses of constraints including performance, predictability,storage, thermal, power and others, and have arrived at someunique observations about autonomous driving systems. Forinstance, we discover it is critical for the system to be ableto inish the end-to-end processing at a latency less than 100ms and a frame rate higher than 10 frames per second, to reactfast enough to the constantly changing traic condition.To capture the stringent performance predictability requirementsof such mission critical real-time system, tail latency(i.e., high quantiles of the latency distribution) should be usedto quantify the performance of the system. We also ind thepower consumption of such system is heavily magniied (almostdoubled) by the increased cooling load to remove heatgenerated by the computing system to keep the passengercabin within a tolerable temperature, making it challengingto leverage power-hungry computational platforms withoutsigniicantly degrading the vehicle driving range and fueleiciency.第二个问题？如何对这个系统进行profile采用YOLO进行目标检测。流式进入目标检测引擎。坐标进入目标跟踪引擎。做出了一个自动驾驶系统。融入3D 目标进行检测The algorithmic componentswe use represent the most up-to-date advancements in relevantields, as they have won the corresponding machinelearning challenges recently (e.g., YOLO [57] won the multiobjectdetection challenge [16]). In this architecture (detailedin Section 2.3), the video captured by cameras are streamedinto an object detection engine to detect interested objectsand a localization engine to locate the vehicle based on thenearby landmarks in parallel. The detected object coordinatesare then fed into an object tracking engine that tracksthe moving objects to predict their moving trajectories. Theoutput of the object detection engine and the localizationengine is then fused onto the same 3D coordinate space toplan out the operational decisions.作者发现：object detection,object tracking and localization, account for more than94% of the computation.这些为目前的处理器处理带来瓶颈。  但是事实上，强化学习的深度网络，策略搜索树等。这些技术并没加入此系统里面。作者采用了3中加速器来进行加速。取得了不错的效果我们来看一下自动驾驶的系统的流程连接一下目前开源的系统为：[37] Shinpei Kato, Eijiro Takeuchi, Yoshio Ishiguro, Yoshiki Ninomiya,Kazuya Takeda, and Tsuyoshi Hamada. 2015. An open approach toautonomous vehicles. IEEE Micro 35, 6 (2015), 60ś68.[72] Udacity. 2017. An Open Source Self-Driving Car. htps://www.udacity.com/self-driving-car. (2017).以及百度的阿波罗系统。
